Create rule S6406[terraform]: Excessive Granting Of GCP IAM Permissions Is Security-Sensitive (#724)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6406/terraform/rule.adoc

is:

* stopped
* disabled
* canceled
* deleted
* destroyed
* detached
* disconnected
* suspended
* rejected
* removed.

For operations teams to be resilient in this scenario, their organization must
apply both:

* Detection security: log these actions to better detect malicious actions.
* Preventive security: review and limit granted permissions.

This rule raises an issue when a custom role grants a number of sensitive permissions
(read-write or destructive permission) that is greater than a given parameter.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise:

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

== Sensitive Code Example

This custom role grants more than 5 sensitive permissions:

[source,terraform]
----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [ # Sensitive

>     "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive permission (read-write)
>     "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive permission (destructive)
>     "resourcemanager.projects.get",
>     "resourcemanager.projects.list",
>     "run.services.create", # Sensitive permission (read-write)
>     "run.services.delete", # Sensitive permission (destructive)
>     "run.services.get",
>     "run.services.getIamPolicy",
>     "run.services.setIamPolicy",  # Sensitive permission (read-write or destructive)
>     "run.services.list",
>     "run.services.update",  # Sensitive permission (read-write or destructive)
>   ]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive permission
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive permission
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create", # Sensitive permission
    "run.services.delete", # Sensitive permission
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",  # Sensitive permission
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",  # Sensitive permission
  ]
```

This custom role grants less than 5 sensitive permissions:

[source,terraform]
----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/recommender-overview[GCP Docs] - Enforce least privilege with role recommendations
* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/manage-policy-insights[GCP Docs] - Security Insights
* https://owasp.org/Top10/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A1] - Boken Access Control
* https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A5_2017-Broken_Access_Control[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A5] - Broken Access Control
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/668.html[MITRE, CWE-668] - Exposure of Resource to Wrong Sphere

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

* Primary Message: This role grants more than ``max`` sensitive permissions. Make sure they are all required.

> * Secondary Message: Sensitive permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Secondary Message: Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
```

in the infrastructure, such as what is -

* added
* written down
* updated
* started
* appended
* applied
* accessed.

Once the malicious intent is executed, attackers must avoid detection at all
costs. +
To counter attackers' attempts to remove their fingerprints, operations teams
must control what unexpectedly disappears from the infrastructure, such as what
is -

* stopped
* disabled
* canceled
* deleted
* destroyed
* detached
* disconnected
* suspended
* rejected
* removed.

For operations teams to be resilient in this scenario, their organization must
apply both:

* Detection security: log these actions to better detect malicious actions.
* Preventive security: review and limit granted permissions.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise, 

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

== Sensitive Code Example

> Lightweight custom role intended for a user who needs to develop:

Reviewer: I changed "user who needd [xx]" to "developer" and "read-only user" for clarity after your suggestion. But the message I wanted to convey was that they "didn't need more than", do you think this message is still conveyed?

> Lightweight custom role intended for a user who needs to develop:

Reviewer 2: Yea, I think it still is :+1:

----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

> Lightweight custom role intended for a user who needs visibility only:

Reviewer 2: `user who needs visibility only` also sounds a bit strange to me.

    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:

----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
  ]
}
----

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/recommender-overview[GCP Docs] - Enforce least privilege with role recommendations
* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/manage-policy-insights[GCP Docs] - Security Insights
* https://owasp.org/Top10/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A1] - Boken Access Control
* https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A5_2017-Broken_Access_Control[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A5] - Broken Access Control
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/668.html[MITRE, CWE-668] - Exposure of Resource to Wrong Sphere

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed,
and favor read-only over read-write.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

=== Parameters

.max
****

----
5
----

Maximum number of permissions a single custom role is allowed to grant.
****

```

compromised, proactive measures include both following GCP Security Insights
and ensuring custom roles contain as few privileges as possible.

After gaining a foothold in the target infrastructure, sophisticated attacks
typically consist of two major parts. +
First, attackers must deploy new resources to carry out their malicious intent.
To guard against this, operations teams must control what unexpectedly appears
in the infrastructure, such as what is -

* added
* written down
* updated
* started
* appended
* applied
* accessed.

Once the malicious intent is executed, attackers must avoid detection at all
costs. +
To counter attackers' attempts to remove their fingerprints, operations teams
must control what unexpectedly disappears from the infrastructure, such as what
is -

* stopped
* disabled
* canceled
* deleted
* destroyed
* detached
* disconnected
* suspended
* rejected
* removed.

For operations teams to be resilient in this scenario, their organization must
apply both:

* Detection security: log these actions to better detect malicious actions.
* Preventive security: review and limit granted permissions.

> 

Reviewer 3: This rule raise an issue when a custom role grants a number of sensitive permissions (read-write or destructive permission) that is superior too given as a parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This rule raises an issue when a custom role grants a number of sensitive permissions (read-write or destructive permission) that is greater than a given parameter.

```

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise:

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

== Sensitive Code Example

Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

----

> resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
>   permissions = [
>     "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.get",
>     "resourcemanager.projects.list",
>     "run.services.create",
>     "run.services.delete",
>     "run.services.get",
>     "run.services.getIamPolicy",
>     "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
>     "run.services.list",
>     "run.services.update",
>   ]
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" { 
  permissions = [ # Sensitive: This role grants more than X sensitive permission. Make sure they are all required
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create", # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
    "run.services.delete", # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",  # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",  # "Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive"
  ]
}
```

    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:

----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
  ]
}
----

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/recommender-overview[GCP Docs] - Enforce least privilege with role recommendations
* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/manage-policy-insights[GCP Docs] - Security Insights
* https://owasp.org/Top10/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A1] - Boken Access Control
* https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A5_2017-Broken_Access_Control[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A5] - Broken Access Control
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/668.html[MITRE, CWE-668] - Exposure of Resource to Wrong Sphere

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed,
and favor read-only over read-write.

=== Parameters

.max
****

----
5
----

> Maximum number of permissions a single custom role is allowed to grant.

Reviewer 3: given as a parameter
```suggestion
Number of sensitive permissions for a custom role.
```

costs. +
To counter attackers' attempts to remove their fingerprints, operations teams
must control what unexpectedly disappears from the infrastructure, such as what
is -

* stopped
* disabled
* canceled
* deleted
* destroyed
* detached
* disconnected
* suspended
* rejected
* removed.

For operations teams to be resilient in this scenario, their organization must
apply both:

* Detection security: log these actions to better detect malicious actions.
* Preventive security: review and limit granted permissions.

This rule raises an issue when a custom role grants a number of sensitive permissions
(read-write or destructive permission) that is greater than a given parameter.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise:

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

== Sensitive Code Example

Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,terraform]
----
```

resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,terraform]
----
```

resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",             # Sensitive
    "run.services.delete",             # Sensitive
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",             # Sensitive
  ]
}
----

== Compliant Solution

Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,terraform]
----
```

resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,terraform]
----
```

resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
  ]
}
----

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/recommender-overview[GCP Docs] - Enforce least privilege with role recommendations
* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/manage-policy-insights[GCP Docs] - Security Insights
* https://owasp.org/Top10/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A1] - Boken Access Control
* https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A5_2017-Broken_Access_Control[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A5] - Broken Access Control
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/668.html[MITRE, CWE-668] - Exposure of Resource to Wrong Sphere

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed,
> and favor read-only over read-write.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Primary Message: This role grants more than ``max`` sensitive permissions. Make sure they are all required.
* Secondary Message: Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
```

(read-write or destructive permission) that is greater than a given parameter.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise:

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

== Sensitive Code Example

Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

[source,terraform]
----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:

----

> resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
>   permissions = [
>     "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.get",
>     "resourcemanager.projects.list",
>     "run.services.create",             # Sensitive
>     "run.services.delete",             # Sensitive
>     "run.services.get",
>     "run.services.getIamPolicy",
>     "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive
>     "run.services.list",
>     "run.services.update",             # Sensitive
>   ]
> }
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [ # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.delete",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
  ]
}
----
```

Excessive granting of GCP IAM permissions can allow attackers to exploit an
organization's cloud resources with malicious intent.

To prevent improper creation or deletion of resources after an account is
compromised, proactive measures include both following GCP Security Insights
and ensuring custom roles contain as few privileges as possible.

After gaining a foothold in the target infrastructure, sophisticated attacks
typically consist of two major parts. +
First, attackers must deploy new resources to carry out their malicious intent.
To guard against this, operations teams must control what unexpectedly appears

> in the infrastructure, such as what is -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the infrastructure, such as what is:
```

* added
* written down
* updated
* started
* appended
* applied
* accessed.

Once the malicious intent is executed, attackers must avoid detection at all
costs. +
To counter attackers' attempts to remove their fingerprints, operations teams
must control what unexpectedly disappears from the infrastructure, such as what

> is -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is :
```

* stopped
* disabled
* canceled
* deleted
* destroyed
* detached
* disconnected
* suspended
* rejected
* removed.

For operations teams to be resilient in this scenario, their organization must
apply both:

* Detection security: log these actions to better detect malicious actions.
* Preventive security: review and limit granted permissions.

This rule raises an issue when a custom role grants a number of sensitive permissions
(read-write or destructive permission) that is greater than a given parameter.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* This custom role will be mostly used for read-only purposes.
* Compliance policies require read-only access.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To reduce the risks associated with this role after a compromise:

* Reduce the list of permissions to grant only those that are actually needed.
* Favor read-only over read-write.

> == Sensitive Code Example

Reviewer 3: I don't belive one code example is enough. Same for " Compliant Solution" section.

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I meant "one is enough"

> Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

Reviewer 3: This code is not really useful.
What would be useful I believe is to explain why it is considered sensitive:

```suggestion
This custom role grants more than 5 sensitive permissions
```

[source,terraform]
----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [ # Sensitive
    "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.delete", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.setIamPolicy",  # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",  # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
  ]
}
----

> 
> Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:
> 
> [source,terraform]
> ----
> resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
>   permissions = [ # Sensitive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.create", # Sensitive permission: read-write
>     "resourcemanager.projects.delete", # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
>     "resourcemanager.projects.get",
>     "resourcemanager.projects.list",
>     "run.services.create",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
>     "run.services.delete",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
>     "run.services.get",
>     "run.services.getIamPolicy",
>     "run.services.setIamPolicy",       # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
>     "run.services.list",
>     "run.services.update",             # Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive
>   ]
> }
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== Compliant Solution

> Lightweight custom role intended for a developer:

Reviewer 3: Same here:

```suggestion
This custom role grants less than 5 sensitive permissions
```

[source,terraform]
----
resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
  permissions = [
    "resourcemanager.projects.get",
    "resourcemanager.projects.list",
    "run.services.create",
    "run.services.delete",
    "run.services.get",
    "run.services.getIamPolicy",
    "run.services.list",
    "run.services.update",
  ]
}
----

> 
> Lightweight custom role intended for a read-only user:
> 
> [source,terraform]
> ----
> resource "google_project_iam_custom_role" "example" {
>   permissions = [
>     "resourcemanager.projects.get",
>     "resourcemanager.projects.list",
>     "run.services.get",
>     "run.services.getIamPolicy",
>     "run.services.list",
>   ]
> }
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== See

* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/recommender-overview[GCP Docs] - Enforce least privilege with role recommendations
* https://cloud.google.com/iam/docs/manage-policy-insights[GCP Docs] - Security Insights
* https://owasp.org/Top10/A01_2021-Broken_Access_Control/[OWASP Top 10 2021 Category A1] - Boken Access Control
* https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A5_2017-Broken_Access_Control[OWASP Top 10 2017 Category A5] - Broken Access Control
* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/668.html[MITRE, CWE-668] - Exposure of Resource to Wrong Sphere

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''

== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

* Primary Message: This role grants more than ``max`` sensitive permissions. Make sure they are all required.

> * Secondary Message: Sensitive permission: read-write or destructive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Secondary Message: Sensitive permission
```
